(background) Caeleb Remel Dresel was born in Green Cove Springs, Florida on August 16th, 1996. He trained with the Jax Aquatics Club in his youth but is now training with the University of Florida’s pro-group, the Gators and is coached by Anthony Nesty. Dressel specialised in freestyle, butterfly, and individual medley events. He is especially good in sprint swimming.

(achievements) He made his Olympic debut in 2016 at the Rio Olympic Games where he won his first gold medal in the 4x100m freestyle relay. He then went through a great run on wins when he won a record seven gold medals at the 2017 World Aquatics Championships in Budapest, nine medals, six of which were gold, at the 2018 World Short Course Championships in Hangzhou, and eight medals, including six golds at the 2019 World Aquatics Championships in Gwangju. He is a nine-time Olympic gold medallist and holds world records in the 100m butterfly (long course) and the 100m individual medley (short course).

(Tokyo 2020) At the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, he won five gold medals, which made him the fifth American to win five golds in one single Olympics after 1970. He is also the first male swimmer to win medals in the 50-100 freestyle and the 100m butterfly at the same Olympics. At the 2024 Paris Olympics, Dressel won two golds in the relay evens (4x100 freestyle relay and 4x100 mixed medley relay).

(records) Dressel holds American records in the 50m freestyle, 50m butterfly and 100m butterfly (long course), and the 50m freestyle and 100m butterfly (short course). He also holds American records in those events whilst swimming in the NCAA circuit during his college years in Florida.

(unique technical elements) Dresel’s unique technical aspects show in his extreme head-up breathing during freestyle and his powerful underwater kicks. In his sprint freestyle, he often has a pronounced head turn/lift during the breath that is faster and more aggressive than many of his peers. He has an early vertical forearm technique which helps him catch water more effectively and maximizes his distance per stroke.  More importantly, he is known for having one of the most powerful and longest underwater dolphin kicks in the world, which is a key technical aspect he relies on to gain massive distance off the start and turns. They are characterized by a slight pause before starting, maximizing speed and efficiency. His kicks are also powered by a strong core engagement and controlled undulation, contributing to his explosive performance.

(his famous starts) He is famously known for having one, if not the best start in the world. His start off the blocks involves a high-hip stance and a powerful arm swing, creating a unified effort that propels him far very explosively. He then achieves a very clean and narrow entry into the water, maximizing the velocity he gained from the block launch and minimizing drag. He rides that initial speed, delaying the start of his underwater kick just lightly to maintain the high velocity carried over from the air. Then, he consistently pushes his underwaters to the legal limit of 15m creating a massive gap over the competition before even taking his first stride.  