(background) Ian James Thorpe was born Sydney, Australia on October 13th, 1982. He swam for the SLC Aquadot swimming club and was coached by Doug Frost and Tracey Menzies. He is a retired competitive swimmer since 2012.  

(achievements) He became the youngest male ever to represent Australia at the age of 14 and his victory in the 400m freestyle at the Perth World Championships in 1998 made him the youngest-ever individual male World Champion. After that victory, he went on to win and dominate that event at every Olympic, World, Commonwealth and Pan Pacific Swimming Championship until his break after the 2004 Olympics in Athens.  

(dominant years) He specialised in freestyle events but also competed in backstroke and individual medley. He has won five Olympic gold medals, the second most won by any Australian after fellow Australian Emma McKeon. With three golds and two silvers, he was the most successful athlete at the 2000 Summer Olympics, held in his hometown in Sydney. At the 2001 World Championship, he became the first person to win six gold medals in one World Championship. Aside from 13 individual long-course world records, Thorpe anchored the Australian relay teams and has tallied 5 team world records. His podium finishes in the 100-200-400 events at the 200 Summer Olympics made him the only athlete to manage that feat. He acquired the nickname “Thorpedo” because of his speed. In total, Thorpe won eleven World Championship gold medals: the fifth-highest number of gold medals won by any male swimmer.  

(retirement and comeback) Thorpe decided to retire from competitive swimming in November 2006 but decided to come back to the sport in 2011. He unfortunately did not make the cut during Olympic trials to make the 2012 London Olympics’ team.  

(unique technique) Thorpe was heavily recognized for his unique freestyle technique, which was characterized by a high elbow catch and powerful kick. The “Thorpe Kick”, a six-beat kick modified to generate massive propulsion is what made him so fast. He had famously large feet (size US 17) and an immense motor. His freestyle was known for its massive powerful six-beat flutter kick that drove his long stroke. He had an aggressive hand entry phase and an incredibly efficient catch-up, which combined with his unique proportions, made his stroke look unlike anyone else’s in the pool. That allowed for exceptional speed and efficiency. His long and streamlined body position reduced drag, contributing to quicker race times. Thorpe’s training regiments included high-intensity workouts and a meticulous focus on technique, which helped him set numerous world records and become one of the greatest swimmers in history.  