(Introduction) Kaylee Rochell McKeown was born in Queensland, Australia on July 12th, 2001. She trains with the Griffith University pro-group coached by Michael Bohl. She specializes in the backstroke and individual medley events.

(Achievements) She dominates the current field in backstroke events and is a quintuple Olympic gold medallist. She is the reigning Olympic champion in the 100-200 backstroke and is the world record holder in the long course 50m backstroke and the long course and short course 200m backstroke world record holder. She is the former world record holder in both the long course and the short course 100m backstroke event. She won gold in the 100-200 at both the 2020 and 2024 Olympic games. In 2023, she was named “Best Female Swimmer of the Year” by World Aquatics, after sweeping gold in all three events of backstroke at all three World Cup legs, held in Berlin, Athens and Budapest in October 2023.

(Early days) She was 15 years old when she joined the Australian Dolphins swim team where she was one of the youngest members. She made her first appearance on the Olympic stage at the Bueno Aires 2018 Youth Olympics, where she won the women’s 50m backstroke gold, alongside silver in the 100m backstroke and bronze in the 200m backstroke.

(2020 Olympic Games) In the run up to the Olympic games in Tokyo 2020, she clocked a 57.45 to break the 100m backstroke world record. She then backed up that performance at the Games, winning two individual gold medals in the 100-200 backstroke and another gold as part of the all-star Australian women’s 4x100m medley team that also featured Chelsea Hodges, Emma McKeon and Cate Campbell, narrowly edging ahead of the American team.

(Versatility) She is a highly versatile athlete. In the run up to Tokyo 2020, she won the 200m individual medley at the Australian National Championship but withdrew from the event in order to focus on her backstroke events. In backstroke, she can excel in high power sprint events like the 50m but also be very good in the endurant and painful 200m.

(What makes her so good) Her success in swimming is a mix of many factors. She has exceptional technique with a smooth yet powerful backstroke technique that is a hallmark of her swimming style. Her unwavering mental strength and mental fortitude are evident in her ability to perform under pressure and maintain focus during races. After losing her father to brain cancer, she turned her grief into a superhuman strength, demonstrating her ability to overcome personal challenges and building her resilience.

(Technical elements) Her technique differs to other backstroke swimmers due to her hyper flexibility in her elbows. With the slight advantage, she starts the catch of her stroke behind her head, and she has trained to work with it to pull more water during her pull. She has a unique approach to racing, which involves embracing nerves and discomfort to fuel her race. She actively seeks discomfort and chases pain in the final stretch. She pushes herself to the brink, starting races aggressively and enduring excruciating pain in the last few meters of her event.  