(Introduction) Michael Fred Phelps was born in Maryland, United States on June 30th, 1985. He swam for the North Baltimore Aquatic Club and was coached by coaching legend Bob Bowman. He is an incredible versatile swimmer, competing in multiple strokes and distances whilst still specialising in butterfly and individual medley events. He is the most decorated athlete of all time with a haul of 28 Olympic medals: 23 golds, 3 silvers and 2 bronze.

(Achievements) He is a former long course world record holder in multiple events: the 200m freestyle, the 100-200 butterfly, and the 200-400 individual medley. He has won 82 medals in major international long course competitions, of which 65 were gold, 14 were silver, and 3 bronze, spanning the Olympics, the World Championships, and the Pan Pacific Championships. His international titles and record-breaking performances have earned him the World Swimmer of the Year Award eight times and the American Swimmer of the Year Award eleven times, as well as the FINA Swimmer of the Year Award in 2012 and 2016. 

(Early career) He attended his first Olympics in 2000 at the Sydney Olympic games, the youngest man in the Unites States for an Olympics team in 68 years. He came close to a podium only in the 200m butterfly, where he finished fifth. From then on, he would dominate the next four Games, finishing as the most decorated athlete at every one. In Athens 2004, he won six gold medals and two bronze medals, falling just short of Mark Spitz’s world record of seven gold medals in one Games. 

(Beijing 2008) Beijing 2008 would see the greatest ever medal haul by a single athlete in one Olympic Games. He managed to win eight golds, one gold medal for every event he entered, and broke world records in seven of them. His record looks unlikely to be surpassed anytime soon. 

(End of career) In London 2012, he got four golds and two silvers whilst in Rio 2016, he staged a historic comeback. At age 31, he had decided to retire but decided to stick around for one more Olympics. He managed to bag five gold medals and one silver medal. He’s been retired since the end of the 2016 Rio Olympics and now works for his own charitable foundation (the Michael Phelps Foundation), which has a particular emphasis on mental health of children. 

(Physiology) He is the cookie cutter model of the ideal swimmer. Standing at a height of 6ft4in (1.93m) and with a wingspan of 6ft7in (2.01m), he has the ideal stature to have better surface area coverage when it comes to pulling water to move forward at a faster pace. He has a long torso and shorter legs, which makes him able to rotate his upper body more efficiently and reduce drag in his lower extremities. He has large hands (9.5 in/24cm) and feet (14in/36cm) which act as natural paddles and flippers, making him able to pull more water. He also has very flexible ankles making him able to generate more power in his kicks, especially in butterfly. Finally, he produces 50% less lactic acid than the regular person, which allows him to have a shorter recovery time and makes him able to endure longer distances.

