(introduction) Summer Ann McIntosh was born in Toronto, Canada on August 18Th, 2006. She trained with the Sarasota Sharks in Sarasota, Florida under the coaching of Brent Arckey. In August 2025, she announced that she would part with Arckey to join the University of Texas’ pro-group under the training of coaching legend, Bob Bowman. She is the daughter of Greg McIntosh and former Canadian Olympic team swimmer Jill Horstead. She is noted for her strength in individual medley, freestyle, and butterfly events.

(achievements) She is a three-time Olympic champion from the 2024 Paris Olympic games, an eight-time World Aquatics Champion, and a two-time Commonwealth Games gold medallist. She is also the world record holder in the 200-400 individual medley events and the 400 freestyle. She has set the current 200m butterfly world record at the last Olympics games. In the short course pool, she is a four-time World Swimming Championship gold medallist and holds world records in the 400m freestyle, 400m individual medley, and in the 200m butterfly.

(early days) She first drew recognition when she became the youngest member of the Canadian team at the age of 14 years old for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. She achieved a 4th place finish in the 400m freestyle, missing out on a podium finish by 1.34 seconds. The following year, she became the youngest World Aquatics champion in swimming in over a decade, and the first Canadian to win two gold medals at a single World Championship. She was then dubbed a “teen swimming sensation”. In March and April 2023, in the span of five days, she set her first and second world records in the 400m freestyle and 400 individual medley events, at the Canadian national trials. McIntosh’s performance at the 2024 Paris Olympics, in which she won four individual medals (three golds, one silver), further increased her fame, with Time Magazine dubbing it the “Summer of Summer”. McIntosh has broken over 50 age group national swimming records. In May 2021, she swam a 4:05.13 in the 400m freestyle, the fastest time ever by a 14-year-old swimmer worldwide.

(2025 World Championships) At the 2025 World Aquatics Championships in Singapore, Summer McIntosh entered the 200m butterfly as a favourite for the gold with speculations for a possibility to break the world record of 2:01.81 set in 2009, a “super suit era” world set by Chinese swimmer Liu Zige. It is the longest standing world record in women’s competitive swimming in 16 years. McIntosh won with a time of 2:01.99 and just missed the record by 0.18 seconds. It was a “standing on the edge of your seat” kind of race, where good racing makes the sport even more exciting.

(what makes her so good) What makes her so good is her relentless work ethic and dedication to her craft. She is training consistently and improving her performance in the pool. She also can express herself emotionally during races, which is highlighted by her coach as an ability to showcase her unique talent. Technique wise, a lot of modern technical elements can be analysed in her stroke. In her main stroke, butterfly, she keeps her body line very horizontally to the surface of the water to maintain energy and reduce drag. She also has fast transitions at the walls and maintains balance in her hips in all of her strokes.  