Breaststroke is a unique stroke, it is the only stroke in which the arms recover over the water, instead of above it. It is also the slowest of the four competitive strokes. The kick in breaststroke is also different from the kick in the other strokes. Breaststroke is also the only stroke that has a glide phase, which has a period without movement.

Each cycle in breaststroke consists of one arm pull and one leg kick. In breaststroke, the pull plays a smaller role than in the other strokes, it provides about 30% of the propulsion and 70% of the propulsion comes from the legs, making the kick important for speed and efficiency.

Arm movement

The arm motion is separated into two phases: the pull and the recovery.

· Pull

The pull is powered by the strongest muscles of the upper body: the latissimus dorsi and the pectorals. These large muscles provide power and endurance. The shoulder muscles are used to make sure the arm movement is precise and controlled. The deltoids control shoulder flexion and rotation and the rotator cuff muscles stabilize the shoulder joint. The forearm muscles are used to keep the wrists stable to apply even pressure against the water. The biceps and triceps control the movement of the elbow. All these smaller muscles are key to the pull since they support the latissimus dorsi and the pectorals.


· Recovery

Recovery in breaststroke is unique because it is done with the arms staying under water, which can be tricky since that creates a lot of drag if it isn’t done efficiently. The deltoids lift and bring the arms forward with the help of the pectorals. The trapezius and rhomboids stabilize the shoulder blades. The triceps extend the elbow as the arms go forward while the bicep and forearm muscles stabilize the movement and control its speed.

Kick

Kick in breaststroke is also completely different from kick in other strokes. In breaststroke, the feet are turned out instead of in and the legs move forward and backward in a simultaneous circular motion instead of up and down.

There are two main phases: the outsweep and the propulsive phase.

· Outsweep

This is the phase where the legs are being brought towards the hips. The hamstrings bend the knees and bring the heels to the hips with the help of the hip flexors. The tibialis anterior are used to turn the feet outward.


· Propulsive phase

This is the phase where the swimmer kick backward. The quadriceps and glutes push backward against the water and extend the legs. At the end of the kick, the abductors squeeze the legs together to create the most propulsion.


Body position

In breaststroke, an efficient body position keeps the hips near the surface, which reduces drag and help maintain speed which is key to swimming faster.

The abdominal muscles (rectus abdominal and obliques) are crucial to stabilize the core and make sure the spine isn’t rounded or unnecessarily arched. The abdominals are also used to make the body return to a straight position after. The spinal muscles (erector spinae) are also used during the breathing to help lift the body in a way that allows the hips to stay at the surface. The glutes and lower back muscles also help to align the body during the glide phase.