When performed well, butterfly looks effortless and powerful. Its defining feature is that both arms recover above the water at the same time, creating the impression that the swimmer is flying. Despite what it looks like, butterfly is not an easy stroke. It requires a lot of upper body power, precise timing and a lot of practice.

In butterfly, the arm movement provides the most propulsion, while the legs and the core play a key role in maintaining a good balance.

The Arm Movement

The arm stroke in butterfly can be split into four phases just like freestyle and backstroke

1. Hand Entry

2. Catch

3. Pull

4. Recovery

Each phase involves a different set of muscles:

· Hand entry

The shoulder blades muscles position the arms for a great catch and a great pull. To stabilize the hands and keep them in the best position, the swimmer uses the multiples muscles in the wrist.

· Catch

The latissimus dorsi and the pectorals begin to press downward on water. The shoulder muscles and rotator cuff muscles stabilize the shoulder joint and support the shoulder adduction. The bicep and the forearm flexors help to maintain the forearm and the wrist in an efficient position.

· Pull

During the pull, nearly every muscle in the upper body work, but the latissimus dorsi and the pectorals are the primary muscles. They bring the arms backward while pushing as much water as possible towards the hips. The triceps are used to stabilize the elbow during most of the pull and to increase hand speed at the end of the pull. The deltoids, biceps and core muscle also contribute to the movement.


· Recovery

As the arms exit the water, the deltoids lift and recover the arms forward above the water. The trapezius, rhomboids and rotator cuff muscles stabilize and control the motion.

The legs

The kick in butterfly is a simultaneous double legged kick, which means that both legs move together. The kick, just like in freestyle and backstroke, is vertical, with an up and down motion. It is important for the kick to be timed well, since the kick is essential to keep the hips from

sinking when the swimmer breath. A great kick also helps to reduce drag during breathing. The kick can be split in two movements: the downbeat and the upbeat.

· Downbeat (kick downward):

The quadriceps are used to extend the knee, and the hip flexors bring the thigh forward and down.

· Upbeat (kick upward):

The muscles in the back of the legs (hamstrings and glutes) are used to lift the legs to the surface. The abdominal muscles and erector spinae muscles are also used in the up kick to control the hips position. Just like in freestyle, it is important to keep the ankles extended and the toes pointed by using the gastrocnemius and the soleus (calf muscles.


Body position

To keep the body in line throughout the whole stroke, the swimmer uses its torso muscles. To keep an effective position, the swimmer uses the muscles of the front of the torso (abdominal muscles) and the muscles in the back of the torso (erector spinae). These help to control the position of the spine, making it round and flex when necessary. These muscles counteract the tendency of the hips and the legs to sink during breathing, by using these muscles to keep a good body position, the swimmer reduces drag and is more efficient.